Title: Cathedrals
Date: 2011-03-17
Description: Sleepless thoughts on the purpose of churches in the Middle Ages, when one's worldview was certain and foggy.

I woke up at around 2am last night and couldn't get back to sleep. My ankle hurt, my waist, my back, I couldn't find the right position to rest, everything was wrong in my life and in my head. After much tossing and turning in bed, I decided to get up and take my problems to the living room so my wife could sleep undisturbed. She has a lot of work these days besides an injured, pain-in-the-ass husband who complains too much. Messing up with her sleep was the last thing I wanted. So anyway, I sat down on an armchair, put my leg up, grabbed a blanket and got ready to doze off while listening to an audiobook on the iPod. The best thing I could find was a BBC dramatization of "The Hobbit" and, holy goblin, was it well dramatized! Particularly the Gollum character. I had a nightmare where the creature was poking at my ankle with a stick and blowing his nose with my socks. I woke up reaching for one of my socks and then dozed off again a couple of times until I went back to bed at eight in the morning. My wife woke me up at noon and that's when my day began, having breakfast at lunchtime.

I'm on a sick leave, but work always finds its way back into one's day: phone calls, emails, questions, paperwork. After everything was taken care of, I found time to read a short story. Today's was Cathedral, by Ray Carver, a simple episode about a couple who are paid a visit by a blind man, an old friend of the wife's. It's told from the point of view of the husband, who comes across as a sarcastic alcoholic in an uncomfortable situation. Not a bad person, though, just a bit shallow. The three of them have dinner, talk, watch TV. Drink after drink, spiced up with some dope, the narrator's rant goes on and builds up into a final epiphany that catches him kind of off guard, and at a loss for words. It's really something, he says. I guess I agree with him. Carver is really something.

Whatever they mean to the characters in the story, cathedrals don't mean much to me. They're not just something to watch on late night TV, as the narrator says, but close enough. The first thing that comes to mind when I think of a cathedral is a bunch of tourists with ugly baseball caps and camera flashes. Here in Spain, at least in Castille, that's all you get: cities sitting alone in the middle of a lonely, dry plain, with a massive cathedral spiking above the low roofs, and sometimes a castle. Segovia, Ávila, Burgos. Heaven and earth, religion and war. And a bunch of tourists getting off a bus and then on again, to another *castled, cathedraled* city. Things change in the south, in Al-Andalus, lines of olive green take over the landscape and, though there isn't much of it, you can hear water running through the veins of the cities, getting to the right spot where flowers need it in order to blossom in May. But anyway, it's hard to feel any kind of mysticism in any cathedral nowadays, at least for me.

I remember once in Italy, as an exchange student, I'd had it with churches and catholic art and tourists all over the place (of which I was one, I guess). It must have been Bologna or Ravenna or somewhere around there. I wandered off and found this old church, older than all the Renaissance stuff in the tourist guides, I think it was Romanesque or Byzantine or something, run-down kind of place, with two or three old ladies in black, kneeling down and praying at one of the side chapels. It was really quiet and cool inside. No one went in or out for the half hour that I spent inside. Nothing special happened, no epiphany, just a feeling of peace and well-being that I thought must have been the purpose of churches in the Middle Ages, when one's worldview was certain and foggy and you could believe in God and evil spirits and symbols and everything made sense.
