Title: What to Do
Date: 2020-09-12
Description: What to do with one's meaningless life, and accepting pain.

So I'm going through my 46th year on this Earth, and I can't think of any other purpose to it than being awake and experiencing every bit of the ride --the rough and the smooth, the valleys and the peaks-- equipped with the right outlook. Educating that outlook, challenging it often, requires considerable work.

According to [Albert Camus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Myth_of_Sisyphus), accepting that __life is absurd__ is the first step to being fully alive. You can struggle to impose your own changing meanings, sure: it may work for a short time, but in the end you have to play the absurd hero with a smile. Just like mystics of every kind surrendered themselves to the ineffable divine throughout the ages, so does the absurd hero embrace a world devoid of meaning. 

Meaning is a human category, so we are in charge of creating it, but knowing its absurd context. In other words: revolt against the silence of the universe. "However vast the darkness, we must supply our own light," says Stanley Kubrick. And Carl Jung agrees: "As far as we can discern, the sole purpose of human existence is to kindle a light of meaning in the darkness of mere being." 

Mind you, when I speak about experiencing stuff, I'm not talking about hedonism. I mean being mindful and open to each sensation, painful as it may be. In fact, *pain* is necessary. Maybe not the crippling kind (not always, at least), but the bearable discomfort on your knees, your back, your eyes, your heart. Limbs and organs have to be tired, worn and torn, used up to the full. Your brain needs to explode at times trying to overcome the setbacks. They all have to hurt from living --only death will kill the pain entirely. 

Don't waste time avoiding discomfort because it's a losing battle. In fact, the no-pain-no-gain lines, the whole epic of sports, overused as it is by advertisers, has a grain of truth in it: we only thrive in the fray, we die out in the couch. At least, seat like the Buddha, feel the needles in your creaking spine and folded knees. Or the thorns in your head when reality comes a-knocking in your fictional world.

But what does all this cheap talk mean to your everyday life, you middle-aged lazy ass? It means, in essence: stop complaining about the absurdity at work, the stupidity of this city and this country, this species you're a member of. Face up to it and plough your way through. Life's too short to complain, damn it!

> "One always finds one's burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well. This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of that night filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle itself toward the heights is enough to fill aman's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy. 

> (Last line from the Myth of Sisyphus, by Albert Camus)
