Title: The 21st Century
Date: 2022-02-11

In this [article](https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2022/02/russia-invade-ukraine-putin-strategy/621626/) from [The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com), Tom McTague brilliantly dispells that "peculiar modern tendency to describe things we don't like as *belonging to the past*," that is, as temporary anomalies which will be brushed away by the unstoppable march of progress. Oh no, they are more modern than you are. And progress is not always what you'd expect:

> The Taliban are medieval, Donald Trump supporters backward, Brexiteers nostalgic for empire. Under this rubric, Vladimir Putin is a Soviet throwback [...]  

> As brutal as the Taliban is, just like al-Qaeda and the Islamic State, it is not a medieval organization but the product of our globalized age of digital propaganda, social media, and the like.  

> Similarly, Trumpism is an expression not of 1950s America, but of today’s America. And then there’s Putin, who, whatever we want to believe, is a man very much of our world. In fact, not only is he as modern as any Western leader, but compared with those who seem to think that modernity equates with sometime around the year 2000, he is considerably more modern. 

> [...] while we do not know what the 21st century will look like, it is reasonable to assume that it will far more closely resemble Putin’s vision of Darwinian geopolitical struggle than the kind of harmonious, “rules based” globalization that many in the West have hoped for [...]  

> Putin, then, is a modern man, reacting to the modern world, using modern methods in an attempt to make something new. He is conjuring up the spirits of the past in his service, dressing up his aggression in time-honored disguise. Yet we should not be fooled by the old costumes and slogans; the reality is new and real. Putin is trying to bury the old world, not re-create it. And the very fact that he feels he can suggests that we have already arrived somewhere new. 


