Title: The Water Heater
Date: 2011-02-12


Our water heater broke. It's actually been breaking for a while now, dying the slow death of a 15-year-old machine. First the water wasn't hot enough for a shower, then the pressure went down to just a trickle. After a few pointless repairs, our landlady finally caved in and decided to buy us a new one, but we still had to take showers at the gym for a week.

Today, Friday, two guys showed up to install the new one before the weekend. They called yesterday to check if it was OK to start working at 8am. Sure. As usual, though, when you make an early morning appointment, you end up going to bed late.

My cell phone alarm went off shortly before the guys arrived and I barely had time to wash my face and change when they buzzed. First thing, they cut off the water, but I needed my coffee, so I said: "I would offer you guys a cup of coffee, unfortunately the water is off." They got the hint, and we all had our morning coffee, although they waited a little longer because they didn't like their coffee too hot. 

After coffee I could face the morning in full command of my faculties, sort of. The older guy had an arm in a plaster cast and was rushing the younger one because, he said, he had an appointment for physical therapy at 1pm. The younger guy seemed to have a runny nose, so I handed him a few tissues. He said it was his allergies. While they sawed off the old pipes, we commented on the pollution these days (each one of us literally reproducing the day's headlines) and then I excused myself and went back to the living room, where my wife was hard at work with her laptop.

I tried to focus on my (pressing, urgent) stuff too, but the guys requested a bucket, then a ladder, then a piece of cloth to clean up, and newspapers to cover the washer under the heater. So eventually I went back to the kitchen and settled there for good. They cut and burnt and folded and connected pipes (a true 3D maze), and I listened, amazed, to their calculations. We also talked about old arcade videogames –apparently some bar owner had given the older guy one of those big game stands from the 80s and we was really proud of it. Then the conversation moved to the recent smoking ban. They asked for permission to have a cigarette and I unconsciously looked at the gas switch with a worried face, but they still lit their Chesterfields. I grew impatient and cold and imagined a gas explosion, then headed for the bedroom.

I sat there and read for a good twenty minutes, trying to forget the image of our apartment blowing up. I was sitting next to the window, where the sun kept the wooden floor warm. The book was Winesburg Ohio, and it felt good to picture Jesse Bentley kneeling down in the middle of the woods, demanding a sign from the God of Abraham and Moses, and scaring the hell out of his grandson. All the while the sun illuminated the page and warmed up my face and my freezing hands. In the background, the plumbers kept drilling and thumping and laughing, playing the role of master and apprentice. The master said his sister had been working in the US, teaching Spanish, and the apprentice aknowledged that he had tried to learn English but couldn't keep up. They both smoked, holding the cigarettes in their mouths and letting the ashes drop, even though I had made an ashtray of foil paper for them. By 12:50 exactly, everything was finished, but the day had already been ruined for me: my only productive window of oportunity was gone. It's hard to explain, but suffice to say that the bulk of my works happens early in the morning and late in the evening.

Once they left I fought off my anxiety by doing the dishes, taking a shower (at home instead of the gym, finally), ordering and picking up two pizzas for lunch, and going out for a haircut.

While I waited for my turn at the barber shop, two kids were playing with an iPad, and I asked their father about the conspicuous gadget. I explained my doubts about its utility compared to a plain laptop, about preferring a Kindle because of the screen, more comfortable to read. He said he was happy with the iPad because it's many things packed in one single device. He snatched it from his kids and demonstrated some apps, and pretty much sold it to me. I bought every word he said. Just like when the barber suggested to trim my eyebrows and I also bought into it. Who the hell trims their eyebrows? Who the hell needs an iPad? Who the hell wastes half a day just because the plumbers break his concentration?
