Title: Two Observations
Date: 2011-04-23


I always wondered why. Why those long, convoluted sentences instead of shorter, simpler ones. Why that disregard for the reader's comfort. Then, this morning, I set Henry James against Ambrose Bierce. Going, say, from Bierce's "The Damned Thing" to James' "The Two Faces," it stands out clearly: James' labyrinthine style requires full concentration and so makes you pay more attention than you would like to. It's a hook that holds you against your will. Bierce's economy of style, however, makes you feel at home, you relax to the point of dozing off, and you would miss the important details, if there were any. We're lazy by nature, we need the hook, we need to be on edge and grind our teeth in frustration.

Later, reading on my laptop one of the less newsworthy articles of El Pais on Sunday, I noticed that the writer made several 'dated' and sort of arcane references, assuming smart readers would recognize them (I didn't, not totally, and even less would a younger reader, I bet). This happens a lot lately, everyone's a master of their limited domain for a limited time. Despite globalization, there's so much going on, so much to know, that people don't share the same context anymore. Knowledge and experience of the world are becoming so fragmanted that it's nearly impossible to find that recognizable common ground where you say, yes, I know what you're talking about, your nuance, I've been there. Inside jokes are being kept inside one single head. Or maybe it's just me, getting old and confused, witnessing a generation gap for the first time.

Speaking of words as representations of reality, Lugones said "Every word is a dead metaphor. This statement is, of course, a metaphor" --and it seems to me that newer metaphors don't travel far anymore, they only hang out with with a couple of nerdy friends in the back yard, live with their parents until they're 40 and too old to have a life. We may see them passing by and ignore them or just misunderstand them, who are these metaphors? Who cares? Who has the time and energy to interpret them?

So, maybe the only understanding audience worth the trouble is one's future self. Dear me.
